Alright, let's talk about something that might seem kind
of small, but is actually a huge deal
for a well-built website headings.
Now I know what you're thinking.
They're just big, bold text, right?
Well, not exactly as we're about to see,
there may be the most important tool we have
for making content easy to navigate for everyone.
Okay? To really get this, let's use a simple metaphor.
Imagine I hand you a book, the one on the left,
it's got clear chapters, right?
You can easily flip to whatever you need,
but the one on the right, it's just a solid block of text.
No chapters, no sections.
Which one would you even want to read?
Well, for a lot of people, this is exactly
what the web feels like when it doesn't have a good
structure, and that quote just hits the nail on the head.
You know, for someone using a screen reader, someone
who can't see all the visual stuff, like big fonts
and spacing, a page without headings
isn't just a little annoying.
It can be a total deal breaker,
just an impossible wall of text.
So yeah, let's really dig into that first idea.
A book without chapters. What's it actually like?
Trying to find your way around when there are no signposts,
no map, just words.
You know, when you
or I look at a page, our brains do this amazing thing.
Almost instantly we see a visual hierarchy. Big, bold text.
Okay, that's an important section.
Smaller text underneath, that's a subsection.
We just get it. But a screen reader needs a completely
different kind of map.
One that's literally written into the code.
That's the only way a user can build that same mental model
of how the page is laid out.
So the big question is, how do we build that map?
Well, it turns out the web has had this really elegant
solution baked in from the very beginning,
and it's all about something called semantic headings.
Okay? Semantic sounds a little technical,
but all it really means is meaning.
See, we're not just telling the browser
to make some texts look big and bold.
We're giving it a structural meaning.
So an H two tag, it doesn't just say, Hey,
make this text 24 points.
It says, Hey, this is the official start
of a major new section on this page.
It's about meaning, not just looks.
And this is where it gets really cool
because those headings have
that special programmatic meaning
a screen reader can instantly pull all of them out
and just show them to the user as a list.
It's like a popup table of contents.
And just like that, that giant wall of text
transforms into a perfectly navigable outline.
Check it out. This is that superpower in action.
A user can literally just pull up this menu,
see the whole page structure laid out,
and then bam, with one command jump straight
to the eligibility section.
They don't have to listen to all
the stuff that came before it.
I mean, think about what a massive time saver that is. Okay?
So we've got this amazing and table of contents feature,
but for it to actually be useful, it has
to be logical, right?
It needs to follow a few, pretty simple
but really, really crucial rules.
The easiest way to think about this is
to just picture an outline. You'd write
For a school paper.
Seriously, you've got one main title, that's your H one.
Then you have your main points or chapters.
Those are all your H twos
and any supporting details inside those chapters.
Yep, those become H threes, H fours, and so on.
The key thing to remember is
that the number is all about its place in the structure.
It's I importance. It has nothing to do with
how big the text looks on the screen.
Alright? So to keep
That outline nice and logical,
There's one really important
Best practice we should all try
To follow. And it's
this, try not
to skip heading levels as you go down the page.
So for Example, jumping from your main title,
the H one straight to
A subsection, an H
Three, like you see on the right side there, it kind
of breaks the logical flow.
Imagine a screen reader, user hears, heading level one,
and then the very next thing is heading level three.
Their mental map is expecting a level two.
In between when it's missing,
the structure can feel a little broken, a little confusing.
It's a small detail for us,
but it can make a big difference for usability.
And This brings up another super important point.
Not all big, fancy text is actually a heading.
You have to ask yourself,
does this text kick off a totally new distinct section
of content featured collections here on the left?
Absolutely. It's introducing a whole new grid of items.
But a descriptive tagline, like the one on the right,
even if it's styled to be really prominent, that's just part
of the section that came before it.
It's not a new chapter in our book.
It's more like a sentence in the current chapter.
Okay, let's look at a real world
example of how this can go wrong.
So here, the main H one, connect and get inspired.
That's totally correct.
But then notice how it jumps straight to an H three
for the free use section, it skipped H two entirely.
And then that more to discover section,
which is obviously introducing new stuff isn't even marked
as a heading at all for a screen reader user.
This outline is just, well, it's confusing an incomplete.
But now let's contrast that with this perfect example.
See this, we have a nice clear H two
for the whole frequently asked questions section.
Then every category under it, general program information,
deadlines, eligibility, they're all correctly
marked as h threes.
This creates this beautiful, predictable,
and super easy to navigate outline
where the code structure perfectly
mirrors what you see on the screen.
This is what we're aiming for. Alright,
So you're feeling good.
You've got the rules down, right?
Well, hold on. 'cause here comes the
Plot twist. Things
get a little different when
we start talking about mobile.
So what's so fascinating here is this
Huge difference between how iOS
and Android screen readers handle headings.
On an iPhone. A voiceover user hears the whole story heading
Level two, they get the full context.
But on Android, a talkback user just hears heading.
That's It. All
that information about the level, it's just gone.
So what does this mean for us as designers?
It's actually pretty simple.
For an Android user, the difference between an H two
and an H three just doesn't exist,
at least not in what they hear.
But what is still incredibly important
Is that the text is marked as a heading at all
because that's what lets them skip from one heading
to the next, even if they don't know the specific level.
So you might be wondering, how do we handle this?
Do we have to design two totally different experiences?
No way. Absolutely not.
The answer is to design one single logical blueprint
that works for everyone everywhere.
So as a designer, your job
is actually pretty straightforward.
You just have to define the one correct logical hierarchy
from H one down to H six in your designs.
That's it. You create that one perfect outline.
The engineers will take that and implement it, and then iOS
and the web will use all that juicy detail you provided.
Android. It'll just use the basic fact that, yep,
this is a heading to power.
Its navigation. It's one smart design decision
that each platform interprets
in the way that works best for it.
Okay, let's wrap this up with the key takeaways.
Number one, headings are basically a table
of contents for screen reader users.
Super important. Two, always,
always use a logical hierarchy,
just like an outline for a paper.
Three, it's a really good idea
to not skip levels on your way down.
It just keeps things clear.
And finally, number four, you just need
to annotate one good structure
and the platforms will do the heavy lift.
So I'll leave you with this one last thought.
The next time you're designing a page
or a screen, ask yourself, am I designing a clear story
or am I just creating a wall of words?
Because remember, you're not just styling text,
you're crafting a structure, you're telling a story,
and your job is to make sure that story has chapters so
that absolutely everyone can follow along.